this tutorial looks at the difference
between processes and threads the
processes and threads are fundamental
concepts in any multitasking operating
system such as UNIX OS 10 Windows there
are many tools and all these operating
systems that allow you to manipulate
shutdown process is to look at threads
and thread priorities and try to see how
your system is is functioning but first
we're going to look at how basic CPUs
work to give you a background on talking
about processes and threads so we're
first going to look at a simple program
so let's suppose we have a simple
four-step program that gets a number 3
get to number 4 adds those numbers
together and stores the result in memory
every program every step of a program is
converted to what's called an
instruction now instructions and
computers all have a binary code so
here's an instruction and they're all
unique to the CPU so if you had a
Pentium CPU I get three instruction
would have a certain binary code if
you're using a totally different like an
arm CPU could have a totally different
binary code and all these codes are
called the instruction set so all of
these codes are in binary but often
people don't work very well with zeros
and ones we often shorthand this and
write binary as a hexadecimal number
just because it's easier for us to to
manipulate and talk about now the basic
CPU system our computer system has the
CPU at its center and system memory or
Ram for instance in your personal
computer you might have one gigabyte 2
gigabyte 4 gigabytes of system memory
now we're not talking about the hard
disk or any optical disk we're talking
about the system Ram
in a program or these binary codes have
to reside in system memory in order to
be executed so somewhere inner system
Ram will have this program that we want
to execute so if a program is on a hard
drive one of the first things that has
to do is transfer it to system memory
now that program is is then read by the
CPU is transferred to the CPU over one
of the computer buses there are many
different types of buses address and
data buses and control buses and they
all work together a lot of parallel
lines to move all these bits into the
CPU at once
now once the program goes into a CPU you
can think of it as going down a long
queue to be processed so all these
instructions work their way down this
queue so three C was the last
instruction now this long queue is often
given the name pipeline
and the CPU executes all these
instructions using various components
inside the CPU so for instance we might
have a math processor which will do adds
and subtracts sum multiplies can even do
scientific math and we have multiple
components which do some other parts
we'll just call it the execution engine
and so what so it is the heartbeat for
every CPU is a little clock that runs at
a certain frequency so for instance this
clock might run it to gigahertz and it
might go to various stages in the
pipeline pipeline backs we have stages
before a annex and instruction gets
executed but eventually it gets executed
so that's the basic operation of the CPU
now we can think of this program is
actually a thread so we have our CPU
here and we have our program coming in
as a bunch of instructions
and maybe these instructions are from an
application and we'll use maybe
Microsoft Office Word application as
they come in we can think of this as a
unit of execution which means it's a
collection of instructions which
together form some specific task and
that's called a thread so this thread is
being read into our CPU so here we have
a single threaded application and that
was how things work in the days of
ms-dos and command-line based operating
systems very quickly when Windows came
in in Mac OS 10 we quickly moved to a
multitasking operating systems where we
had wanted to have multiple applications
open at once so we may have second
application maybe Excel spreadsheet and
it has its own set of instructions that
are being executed to carry out its task
maybe it's generating a recalculate on a
spreadsheet and so now we have a second
thread that we want to execute and we
wanted to appear to the user that's
being executed at the same time so in
all operating systems were modified to
introduce a new component in here and
this component is called the scheduler
and it was a software component that
basically controls these instructions
getting to the cpu pipeline to be
executed so you can think of it in this
case as having being able to handle the
two threads and it really being just
like a switch that can change positions
from here to here and depending on the
position of the switch if the switches
up here this thread or these
instructions go to the CPU to be
executed and this switch can change to
the bottom position and then this thread
goes in to be executed and this is what
happens in today's multitasking
operating system now when this switches
back and forth it actually does so on a
regular basis and that regular basis is
called a time slice so for instance
maybe the time slice is one millisecond
so in one millisecond we could actually
execute thousands of instructions on
words and then we're going to switch
over and we're going to execute
thousands of instructions from excel and
we're going to switch back and forth
every one millisecond now it's humans to
us this is going to happen so fast it
appears that everything is happening at
the same time or simultaneously just
of multitasking is called pre-emptive
pre-emptive multitasking because it
doesn't rely on any of these
applications to give up control this
scheduler is simply going to take
control away from one application and
give it to another and work it back and
forth what's nice about that if somehow
Excel crashes it's not going to crash
your operating system yes you may lose a
time slice but when you go back here
your word program is going to work fine
and when you notice this is hung you can
actually just close it down by hitting
the close button on your GUI now threads
have other unique characteristics as
well they also have something associated
with them called a priority and a
priority is simply a number some systems
use 1 to 32 1 to 99 so we'll say this
has a priority of 10 and this has a
priority of 2 now built into the
scheduler usually most schedulers simply
give the highest priority thread a
passage to the CPU so what would happen
here is this thread would get executed
and it would just stay on this thread
because this is lower priority there's
usually multiple parts to a scheduler
and part of the schedulers duty is to
boost priorities of threads which don't
get executed so we'll go down here and
we'll execute this thread for one or two
time slices and then we'll boost this
execute boost and eventually this thread
will get up to the same level and then
both threads will then what's called
round-robin they'll both be executed two
time slice until the threads finish
being executed so this is how a
multitasking operating system works now
we talked here about multi-threaded
application
because most programs today and so we're
going to look at a program called word
and now we're going to call this a
process so a process is really a name
for a program but most programs today
are multi-threaded so for instance you
may have one thread or unit of execution
which is just looking for keyboard input
waiting for the user to type something
and then putting it on a screen
maybe you've hit the print key plot or
the print function or when the print
function happens you don't want to wait
for that print to be completed you're
going to get control back to your word
processing program so another thread is
spawned another bunch of instructions
are sent or created and sent to the CPU
which take care of printing in the
background you may want to save a file
that can spawn another thread so most
applications today are multi-threaded
today's CPUs need to be different than
they were twenty years ago because we
have these multi-threaded ol asus multi
tasking OS and we have multi-threaded
applications
so today CPUs are designed to be able to
handle multiple threads more easily and
one of the first systems was on a single
CPU was something called hyper threading
and we talked about this thing called a
pipeline inside the CPU and what hyper
threading did was it duplicated a part
of this pipeline so at least it could
accept two threads
it didn't duplicate some of the
execution engine or the math coprocessor
so sometimes you would have threads that
would start into these two pipelines but
would have to be put on hold
while they waited for maybe the math
processor if they both had to do some
math but it did allow multi-threaded
applications to work a little quicker a
better and generally faster way to
handle multi-threaded applications are
the today's multi-core CPUs where we
have a single CPU and we have more the
pipeline and the execution engine being
duplicated so we would have a pipeline
and we would have its own execution
engine we spirally the best solution is
actually to have multi CPUs two separate
CPUs on a motherboard and many servers
have this type of setup and this is
called symmetric multiprocessing
most expensive multi-core seems to be
where most of the energy is going for
the designs these days you had four core
or eight core of CPUs that handled
multi-threaded applications so this was
designed as a limiter little
introduction to the difference between
processes and threads so the process is
really the program or application that's
running these programs have many threads
that can be spawned as they're executing
and each of these threads have different
priorities and as we're going to see
later there are many tools for
manipulating the shutting down or
viewing of threads and thread priorities